# Beginners Guide To React

## Introduction

We will eventually need to spin up a server to complete some lectures. In order to do this, we can easily implement browser-sync using the folowing node command:

  ```powershell
    # We may be required to install browser-sync as a dependency
    npx browser-sync start --server --files "./*.html" --no-open --no-notify --directory
  ```

## Create a User Interface in JS

To create a user interface in JS we need to have a root DOM  node into which append our JavaScript generate DOM objects. We have to access this root element and create new elements to append to it using the `document` APIs from the browser.

## Create a User Interface with React's createElement API

For the purposes of the exercises, React and ReactDOM are going to be added into the global/window object by means of `<script>`s tags. We can access CDN links though *unpkg.com* for React and ReactDOM.

  ```html
    <script src="https://unpkg.com/react@16.12.0/umd/react.development.js"></script>
    <script src="https://unpkg.com/react-dom@16.12.0/umd/react-dom.developoment.js"></script>
  ```

  - The `React.createElement()` method returns an object with different properties like the following:

  ```javascript
    {
      $$typeof: Symbol(react.element),
      key: null,
      props: {children: "Hello"},
      ref: null,
      type: "div",
      _owner: null,
      _store: {validated: false},
      _self: null,
      _source: null,
      __proto__: Object
    }
  ```

  - It takes the type of HTML element to create, an object with properties for that element, commonly known as the 'component props' and the element's children as arguments: `React.createElement('div', {className, id, ...}, children)`.

## Create a User Interface with React JSX Syntax

The way React's is commonly implemented in the community is by using `JSX` which is an HTML-like syntax in JavaScript.

  - JSX syntax has to be compiled to something that browser can understand. This is where a compiler like Babel comes into play. It Takes the JS/JSX code and compiles it into plain JS code, which can be fully understood by the browser.
  - As with React and React-DOM, we can add a `<script>` tag referencing to the CDN provided for Babel in *unpkg.com*:

  ```html
    <script src="https://unpkg.com/@babe/standalone@7.8.3/babel.js"></script>
  ```

  - Babel is going to look for any `<script>`s with a type of `text/babel` in order to compile it into JS syntax compatible with the browser. The compiled version of our code is going to be automatically added on to our page through a `<script>` block with the transpiled code generated by Babel (HTML-syntax to JS (React APIs) syntax).

  - JSX syntax allows the usage of plain JS wrapping the code to be evaluated directly as JS with `{}`. The key/value pairs we typically set in HTML are going to be compile into the props object for the component in JS-React APIs.
    - We can have self-closing tags with JSX. Also, because the attributes on a JSX HTML-like element are compiled to the props object for `React.createElement()`, we can leverage the usage of the object spread `...` operator. 

## Render Elements side-by-side with React Fragments

In order to pass multiple sibling elements into a `React.createElement()`
